## Part 1: Introduction

#### Introduction
*   We keep mentioning databases, but what actually are they?
*   Well, in its basic form it is a structured set of data held in a computer system. They can be simple, and really, really complex. There are a two main types of database models: relational and non-relational databases. 

#### Relational databases
*   Dominant in 80s 
*   Very popular
*   Data is stored in rows and columns in a table 
*   Can be a bit slow as multiple lookups are made
*   E.g. need to retrieve data from multiple tables to show information
*   Access with SQL (structured Query Language) 
*   SQL designed specifically for accessing data in relational databases

#### Non-relational databases
*   Emerged 2000s 
*   Often referred to as NoSQL
*   Developed in response to demands of modern web apps
*   Key strength is speed: they are very fast
*   Number of different database types: document databases, graph stores, key-value stores and wide-column stores. 

Regardless of which database model you use, the base concept is the same: you use it to store data which can then be retrieved and displayed on the screen.

In order to actually create, and talk, to the database you need a database management system. For a relational database, the most common of these is MySQL. There are others, dependent on the platform e.g. MSSQL (Microsoft). 

We’ll focus on MySQL as it is open-source software that used by many web applications: Wordpress, Drupal, Joomla, Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, YouTube. MySQL is part of the LAMP stack (Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP).

If you’re using a non-relational model, there are a number of different software options. The most common at the moment is [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/). Other options include [Cassandra](http://cassandra.apache.org/), [Redis](https://redis.io) and many more (just google NoSQL databases). Used by SquareSpace, Adobe, eBay ect. 

It is also worth noting that development platforms like [Google’s Firebase](https://firebase.google.com) also offer NoSQL databases which are directly embedded into the platform. Definitely worth having a look at it if you are interested in quickly building a web app. 

#### Creating our web app
We are going to use MySQL to create a CRUD web application - the code we write here will be used for the first assignment. We’ll use MySQL because most of the popular CMS’s that you’ll use in the second assignment use relational databases and we need to ensure we understand how they function. 

CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update and Delete, these are standardised terms that align with the functions of a RESTful API - which you won’t need for this unit, but very important to understand that the terms are not random (Create = POST; Read = GET; Update = PUT; Delete = DELETE). 

You can adapt the code here for your own use, you might choose to initially my example, but ultimately you’ll need to think about what kind of data you will collect for you Tracker app and adjust accordingly. 

The **most important** thing is to work out what data you want to collect **FIRST**, as generally, you’d only set up the database once, and so you want to make sure it is right. 

I’ll be creating a simple app to keep track of artworks in a users collection. In this case I’ve thought about what kind of information I need to gather:
* Artist name
* Work title
* Work date
* Work type (e.g. painting, sculpture, print)

With this in mind, I will be able create my database through a SQL script later on. 

#### Let’s get started
*   First, as with last week, setup the project:
*   Create a new repository on GitHub 
*   Give it a name, e.g. `wk4-web-app`
*   Click the clone/download button and open in GitHub Desktop 
*   Clone the new repository back to your local computer and save in the GitHub folder
*   Minimise GitHub Desktop
*   Make sure MAMP is running

#### Create project structure
*   We’ll have almost the same project structure we have in all of our projects. The root folder should contain an assets folder, within the assets folder, we’ll have a css folder. 
*   Go to the newly created local repository 
*   Create a new folder, call it `public`
*   Go into the public folder, and create a new folder, call it `templates`
*   Create another new folder (also in the `public` folder), call it `assets`
*   Go into the `assets` folder and create a `css` folder

* * *

## Go to [part 2](4.2.md)
