## Part 2: front-end code


#### Write home page
*   Create a new document and save it as `index.php` in the `public` directory
In my new `index.php` page, I will add the default html5 document structure and some basic content:

```
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">

<head>

    <title>Ben's Collection</title>
    <meta charset="utf-8">

    <link rel="stylesheet" href="assets/css/style.css">
</head>

<body>
    <h1>Ben's Collection tracker</h1>

    <ul>
        <li><a href="create.php">Add a new artwork</a></li>
        <li><a href="read.php">Find an artwork</a></li>
    </ul>

</body>

</html>
```

#### Creating a template
The page we have at the moment would be fine, but, it doesn’t really use any of the power of PHP - remember, we aren’t just creating a website using static HTML - so let’s leverage that power and move some of the code into different templates. 

#### Create new pages
Create a new file, call it `header.php` and save it into the `templates` folder we made earlier. 
Create a new file, call it `footer.php` and save it into the `templates` folder we made earlier. 

*   Now, jump back to `index.php`
*   Cut (ctrl/cmd + X) the content between lines 1 -14 (all the content up to the `<ul>`)
*   Paste it into the `header.php` page
*   Do the same with the closing `</body> </html>` tags, but put them into the `footer.php` page. 

What we’re doing here is trying to avoid repetition of the code, this is programming principle known as DRY: Don’t Repeat Yourself. The alternative is WET: Write Everything Twice. DRY is good. 

So, we’ve got these 2 template files now, but they how do they all talk to each other? We need to include the `header.php` and `footer.php` into our `index.php` page:
*   Add in a php include function on the first line: `<?php include "templates/header.php"; ?>`
*   And the same at the end of the document: `<?php include "templates/footer.php"; ?>`
*   You might add a comment too, so that you know what is happening. 

The `index.php` page should look like:
```
<?php include "templates/header.php"; ?>

<ul>
    <li><a href="create.php">Add a new artwork</a></li>
    <li><a href="read.php">Find an artwork</a></li>
</ul>

<?php include "templates/footer.php"; ?>

```


#### Test it!
Ensure MAMP is running, go to the Webserver page, open the project folder and we should see the html page we’ve been creating. 
*   If you click a link, you’ll get a 404 error because the page doesn’t exist yet. 

Let’s create them.
 
#### Create the create page
*   Make a new document, call it `create.php` ensure you save it in the root directory alongside your `index.php` file
*   Add in the templates for the header and footer: 

<script src="https://gist.github.com/ben-ennis-butler/adcbc676e09878feb8f7e7812ebf2aed.js"></script>

#### Make a form 
In order to create a new artwork in my app I need to create a form to capture the various types of data I want to collect. 

If you need a refresher or need more information about forms, read the [form element docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form). The fields types are listed on the left.

*   I start by adding a `form` element between the `header` and `footer`
*   Within that I need to create a label and input for each of the attributes I want to collect
*   Refer to list created earlier - I’ll keep it simple and only record text or text areas for now.

My form will look like:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/ben-ennis-butler/d948d4119c99f0ee2fb2b4aa7c0f6c1f.js"></script>

*   Go and have a look at the page, you’ll see it is unformatted and nothing happens when you click the button. 
*   Let’s create our `read.php` page 

#### Create the read page
*   Make a new document, call it `read.php` ensure you save it in the root directory alongside your `index.php` and `create.php` files
*   Add in the include statements for the header and footer (same as with `create.php`).  
*   It makes sense to include either a search form, or a list of all the results on this page. Let’s just start with a super basic form, with a submit button to load all the results. The whole page should look like:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/ben-ennis-butler/01a99a8400a7325d77b2156f67777714.js"></script>


#### Front-end code done
*   Great! Now we have all the front-end code needed (for now). 
*   Let’s actually connect to the database.
