## Week 4

### Slides

Available [here](4.1_slides.html)

### Detailed notes 

This is what we will do in the workshop...

**Warning** 
This could take some time!

#### Introduction
*   We keep mentioning databases, but what actually are they?
*   Well, in its basic form it is a structured set of data held in a computer system. They can be simple, and really, really complex. There are a two main types of database models: relational and non-relational databases. 

#### Relational databases
*   Dominant in 80s 
*   Very popular
*   Data is stored in rows and columns in a table 
*   Can be a bit slow as multiple lookups are made
*   E.g. need to retrieve data from multiple tables to show information
*   Access with SQL (structured Query Language) 
*   SQL designed specifically for accessing data in relational databases

#### Non-relational databases
*   Emerged 2000s 
*   Often referred to as NoSQL
*   Developed in response to demands of modern web apps
*   Key strength is speed: they are very fast
*   Number of different database types: document databases, graph stores, key-value stores and wide-column stores. 

Regardless of which database model you use, the base concept is the same: you use it to store data which can then be retrieved and displayed on the screen.

In order to actually create, and talk, to the database you need a database management system. For a relational database, the most common of these is MySQL. There are others, dependent on the platform e.g. MSSQL (Microsoft). 

We’ll focus on MySQL as it is open-source software that used by many web applications: Wordpress, Drupal, Joomla, Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, YouTube. MySQL is part of the LAMP stack (Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP).

If you’re using a non-relational model, there are a number of different software options. The most common at the moment is [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/). Other options include [Cassandra](http://cassandra.apache.org/), [Redis](https://redis.io) and many more (just google NoSQL databases). Used by SquareSpace, Adobe, eBay ect. 

It is also worth noting that development platforms like [Google’s Firebase](https://firebase.google.com) also offer NoSQL databases which are directly embedded into the platform. Definitely worth having a look at it if you are interested in quickly building a web app. 

#### Creating our web app
We are going to use MySQL to create a CRUD web application - the code we write here will be used for the first assignment. We’ll use MySQL because most of the popular CMS’s that you’ll use in the second assignment use relational databases and we need to ensure we understand how they function. 

CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update and Delete, these are standardised terms that align with the functions of a RESTful API - which you won’t need for this unit, but very important to understand that the terms are not random (Create = POST; Read = GET; Update = PUT; Delete = DELETE). 

You can adapt the code here for your own use, you might choose to initially my example, but ultimately you’ll need to think about what kind of data you will collect for you Tracker app and adjust accordingly. 

The **most important** thing is to work out what data you want to collect **FIRST**, as generally, you’d only set up the database once, and so you want to make sure it is right. 

I’ll be creating a simple app to keep track of artworks in a users collection. In this case I’ve thought about what kind of information I need to gather:
* Artist name
* Work title
* Work date
* Work type (e.g. painting, sculpture, print)


With this in mind, I will be able create my database through a SQL script later on. 

#### Let’s get started
*   First, as with last week, setup the project:
*   Create a new repository on GitHub 
*   Give it a name, e.g. `wk4-web-app`
*   Click the clone/download button and open in GitHub Desktop 
*   Clone the new repository back to your local computer and save in the GitHub folder
*   Minimise GitHub Desktop
*   Make sure MAMP is running

#### Create project structure
*   We’ll have almost the same project structure we have in all of our projects. The root folder should contain an assets folder, within the assets folder, we’ll have a css folder. 
*   Go to the newly created local repository 
*   Create a new folder, call it `public`
*   Go into the public folder, and create a new folder, call it `templates`
*   Create another new folder (also in the `public` folder), call it `assets`
*   Go into the `assets` folder and create a `css` folder

#### Open the project
* Go to your code editor and open the new project
* If in brackets, change the site folder so that you are editing the right files
* We need to open phpMyAdmin, which is where we can manage the database. 
* You can access phpMyAdmin through the MAMP interface, or try: `http://localhost:8888/phpMyAdmin/?lang=en` 
* We’ll write an SQL query, and then run it in phpMyAdmin

##### Default login (good to know for later)
*   The default host is: `127.0.0.1` or `localhost`
*   The default login username and password is: `root`

#### Database creation 
*   Then create a new file and save it as `db-create.sql`
*   In this new file, we’ll write the following:

```
CREATE DATABASE ben_test;

use ben_test;

CREATE TABLE works (
	id INT(10) UNSIGNED AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY, 
	artistname VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
	worktitle VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
	workdate VARCHAR(30),
    worktype VARCHAR(30),
	date TIMESTAMP
);


```
**Note**
No spaces or dashes in the names, must match form from before

SQL is easy to read and it is pretty obvious what is going on here. 
*   `INT()` = integer (a number, up to 10 characters long)
*   `AUTO_INCREMENT` = a number that will increase - i.e. A unique id 
*   `VARCHAR()` = variable character, can contain letters and numbers
*   `TIMESTAMP` = will add current time, so we know when created, edited etc

#### Let’s create the database

#### Jump back to phpMyAadmin
*   Click the SQL tab at the top
*   Copy the contents from the db-create.sql file into the text area and hit go. 
*   It will create the database, let’s check. 

#### Check the database
*   Click the new database name in the left column `ben_test` 
*   You’ll see a table called `works`, if you click that you’ll see columns with each of the information we created before, but with no content - this is great, means it is all working well!
*   If something didn’t work you need to delete the database and start again. Click the `operations` tab, scroll down until you see `DROP`, and click it and click `ok`

#### Write home page
*   Create a new document and save it as `index.php` in the `public` directory
In my new `index.php` page, I will add the default html5 document structure and some basic content:

```
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">

<head>

    <title>Ben's Collection</title>
    <meta charset="utf-8">

    <link rel="stylesheet" href="assets/css/style.css">
</head>

<body>
    <h1>Ben's Collection tracker</h1>

    <ul>
        <li><a href="create.php">Add a new artwork</a></li>
        <li><a href="read.php">Find an artwork</a></li>
    </ul>

</body>

</html>
```

#### Creating a template
The page we have at the moment would be fine, but, it doesn’t really use any of the power of PHP - remember, we aren’t just creating a website using static HTML - so let’s leverage that power and move some of the code into different templates. 

#### Create new pages
`Create a new file, call it `header.php` and save it into the `templates` folder we made earlier. 
`Create a new file, call it `footer.php` and save it into the `templates` folder we made earlier. 

*   Now, jump back to `index.php`
*   Cut (ctrl/cmd + X) the content between lines 1 -14 (all the content up to the `<ul>`)
*   Paste it into the `header.php` page
*   Do the same with the closing `</body> </html>` tags, but put them into the `footer.php` page. 

What we’re doing here is trying to avoid repetition of the code, this is programming principle known as DRY: Don’t Repeat Yourself. The alternative is WET: Write Everything Twice. DRY is good. 

So, we’ve got these 2 template files now, but they how do they all talk to each other? We need to include the `header.php` and `footer.php` into our `index.php` page:
*   Add in a php include function on the first line: `<?php include "templates/header.php"; ?>`
*   And the same at the end of the document: `<?php include "templates/footer.php"; ?>`
*   You might add a comment too, so that you know what is happening. 

The `index.php` page should look like:
```
<?php include "templates/header.php"; ?>

<ul>
    <li><a href="create.php">Add a new artwork</a></li>
    <li><a href="read.php">Find an artwork</a></li>
</ul>

<?php include "templates/footer.php"; ?>

```


#### Test it!
Ensure MAMP is running, go to the Webserver page, open the project folder and we should see the html page we’ve been creating. 
*   If you click a link, you’ll get a 404 error because the page doesn’t exist yet. 

Let’s create them.
 
#### Create the create page
*   Make a new document, call it `create.php` ensure you save it in the root directory alongside your `index.php` file
*   Add in the templates for the header and footer: 
...
```
<?php include "templates/header.php"; ?>

<?php include "templates/footer.php"; ?>

```

#### Make a form 
In order to create a new artwork in my app I need to create a form to capture the various types of data I want to collect. 

If you need a refresher or need more information about forms, read the [form element docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form). The fields types are listed on the left.

*   I start by adding a `form` element between the `header` and `footer`:
...
```
<form method="post">

</form>
```
*   Within that I need to create a label and input for each of the attributes I want to collect
*   Refer to list created earlier - I’ll keep it simple and only record text or text areas for now.

My form will look like:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/ben-ennis-butler/d948d4119c99f0ee2fb2b4aa7c0f6c1f.js"></script>

*   Go and have a look at the page, you’ll see it is unformatted and nothing happens when you click the button. 
*   Let’s create our `read.php` page 

#### Create the read page
*   Make a new document, call it `read.php` ensure you save it in the root directory alongside your `index.php` and `create.php` files
*   Add in the templates for the header and footer: 
...
```
<?php include "templates/header.php"; ?>

<?php include "templates/footer.php"; ?>
```

It makes sense to include either a search form, or a list of all the results on this page. Let’s just start with a super basic form, with a submit button to load all the results:

...
```
<form method="post">

    <input type="submit" name="submit" value="View all">

</form>
```
#### Front-end code done
*   Great! Now we have all the front-end code needed (for now). 
*   Let’s actually connect to the database.

#### Config file
*   Create a new file in the site directory and call it `config.php`

Add the following:
...
```
<?php

$host       = "localhost";
$username   = "root";
$password   = "root";
$dbname     = "test"; // will use later
$dsn        = "mysql:host=$host;dbname=$dbname"; // will use later
$options    = array(
                PDO::ATTR_ERRMODE => PDO::ERRMODE_EXCEPTION
              );

```
We are using the default host, username and password, as specified earlier.
We’ll call this script from our php pages, by putting it in one spot we are keeping our code DRY

#### Edit the create page
*   Ok, we’re getting there slowly…

#### Go back to `create.php` and we’ll add some more code. 
*   On the first line of the file, add: `<?php` then hit enter a few times and close the tag `?>`
*   Then add this chunk between the php tags (comments included in the code):

...
```
//this code will only execute after the submit button is clicked
if (isset($_POST['submit'])) {
	require "config.php"; //include our config file that we created before

    // this is called a try catch statement 
	try {
        // try and connect to the database
		$connection = new PDO($dsn, $username, $password, $options);
		// insert new work 
        // this array will actually hold the contents of the form
        new_work = array(
            "artistname" => $_POST['artistname'],
            "worktitle" => $_POST['worktitle'],
            "workdate" => $_POST['workdate'],
            "worktype" => $_POST['worktype'],
        );


	} catch(PDOException $error) {
        // if there is an error, tell us what it is
		echo $sql . "<br>" . $error->getMessage();
	}	
}



```
Ok great, now let’s go back to the browser and reload the create page
*   If it doesn’t load it means something is wrong, check your code and try again

Fill in the form and click `submit`

Go to phpMyAdmin and click the `browse` tab, which should reload the database and show the new information we just added!

#### User feedback
*   The only thing missing at this point is some feedback to tell the user that the form submission was successful. 

Add the following code below our `include` statement
...
```
<?php if (isset($_POST['submit']) && $statement) { ?>
<p>Work successfully added.</p>
<?php } ?>


```
#### Create page and database setup done!
*   Good work.
*   The hard bit is over

#### Let’s display some results
*   Go to the `read.php` file we created earlier
*   Copy the database connection code from `create.php`
...
```
<?php 

// this code will only execute after the submit button is clicked
if (isset($_POST['submit'])) {
	
    // include the config file that we created before
    require "../config.php"; 
    
    // this is called a try/catch statement 
	try {
        // FIRST: Connect to the database
        $connection = new PDO($dsn, $username, $password, $options);
		
       

	} catch(PDOException $error) {
        // if there is an error, tell us what it is
		echo $sql . "<br>" . $error->getMessage();
	}	
}
?>


```

Now, we’ll use a select statement to get all the data from the database. The whole block will look like:

...
```
<?php 

// this code will only execute after the submit button is clicked
if (isset($_POST['submit'])) {
	
    // include the config file that we created before
    require "../config.php"; 
    
    // this is called a try/catch statement 
	try {
        // FIRST: Connect to the database
        $connection = new PDO($dsn, $username, $password, $options);
		
        // SECOND: Create the SQL 
        $sql = "SELECT * FROM works";
        
        // THIRD: Prepare the SQL
        $statement = $connection->prepare($sql);
        $statement->execute();
        
        // FOURTH: Put it into a $result object that we can access in the page
        $result = $statement->fetchAll();

	} catch(PDOException $error) {
        // if there is an error, tell us what it is
		echo $sql . "<br>" . $error->getMessage();
	}	
}
?>

```

That gets the data from the database, now let’s actually show it  on the page. Add the following before the include for `header.php`:

...
```

<?php  
    if (isset($_POST['submit'])) {
        //if there are some results
        if ($result && $statement->rowCount() > 0) { ?>
<h2>Results</h2>

<?php 
                // This is a loop, which will loop through each result in the array
                foreach($result as $row) { 
            ?>

<p>
    ID:
    <?php echo $row["id"]; ?><br> Artist Name:
    <?php echo $row['artistname']; ?><br> Work Title:
    <?php echo $row['worktitle']; ?><br> Work Date:
    <?php echo $row['workdate']; ?><br> Work type:
    <?php echo $row['worktype']; ?><br>
</p>
<?php 
                            // this willoutput all the data from the array
                            //echo '<pre>'; var_dump($row); 
                        ?>

<hr>
<?php }; //close the foreach
        }; 
    }; 
?>




```

Now let’s jump back to our page and have a look!

When we hit the show all button, you will see the database results! 


#### Great work!

