# Making your web app available online 

## Option 2: keep the data

### aka: Yes, I want the data.

In this case you'll need to make a copy of the database and import that instead.

There are 3 key steps, please follow along carefully.

## 1. Recreate the database

-   On your local computer, open up MAMP and go to `phpMyAdmin`
-   Click on your database name in the left hand column
-   Then click the `Export` tab
-   Leave the method as `quick` and the format as `sql` and press `Go`
-   Copy the text from the next screen 
-   Open your code editor, create a new document, call it `db-backup.sql` and paste the contents into it

Now, you need to go to your Web host and upload the `sql` file. 

First, create the database
-   From the cPanel of your web host, click `MySQL Databases`
-   Add a database name (make it logical) 
-   Click `Create database `

Second, upload the `sql` file
-   From the create new database page, click The Admin button or click `phpMyAdmin` from cPanel
-   (You'll note that the interface is the same as the version you installed through MAMP)
-   Click the `import` tab
-   Click `Choose file` to select the `db-backup.sql` file we made earlier
-   Click `Go` to create the database

### Update our config file
The database name, username and password will probably have changed. 
-   You will need to update the `config.php` file with the new database connection details. 
-   Your host will tell you what those details are. 
-   I'd suggest making a copy of your current config file so that you rememebr your local details are too 

Currently:

```
$host       = "localhost";
$username   = "root";
$password   = "root";
$dbname     = "ben_test";

```

New (example only for Infinity free hosting - don't use these - they don't work):

```
$host       = "sql206.epizy.com";
$username   = "epiz_23631766";
$password   = "YOUR CPANEL PASSWORD";
$dbname     = "epiz_23631766_work_tracker_app";

```
-   Save the file and move onto stage 2

## 2. Upload the files
Now, we need to upload the files

-   Add your FTP login details to the FTP client and connect to the server
-   On the left hand side, you'll see all the files on yuour local computer, on the right hand side, you can see the files on the server. 
-   Navigate to the `htdocs` or `www` or `public` folder on the server (this is the root directory)
-   This is where you should upload your files
-   Now, navigate to the site folder on your local computer 
-   Select all the files and drag them across from the left to the right 

This will make a copy of all your local files on the server

### Secure the config file 

**Do not make your config.php file accessible**

Remember, this file holds our database login details - if we allow this to be accessible on the web you will get hacked! So let's secure that file straight away.

Some hosts will allow you to move the config file above the `htdocs` folder, so it cannot be accessed - which is great! If you do this, make sure you update any references to it in your site files. 

If you can't move it above the current root directory then you can use a `.htaccess` file to block access to it.

-   Create a new document on your computer
-   Save it as `htaccess.txt`

Add the following:

```
<files config.php>
order allow,deny
deny from all
</files>
```

-   Upload the file to the root directory (`htdocs`) using the FTP program
-   In the FTP program, right click on the new `htaccess.txt` file on the server and click `rename`
-   Rename the file `.htaccess` and click ok
-   Now the file is protected from being accessed

You should be able to visit the server, note that depending on the config above you may need to add the `public` folder to the site address: e.g. `http://your-domain.com/public/`


## 3. Test 

Visit the page and you should be able to add data to your web app