# Wordpress intro

## Wordpress basics

### What is Wordpress?

Wordpress is a CMS (content management system) used to generate webpages accessible on the internet. It started as a basic blogging platform and quickly grew into one of the most popular CMS's around. Other CMS's include Drupal, Joomla, Squiz and plenty more.


### What is a template?
The templates are one of the key components of a CMS. They are the individual files that generate the appearance of your site - these are predefined by the Wordpress system. 

A group of template files is known as a **theme**, which includes all the various templates and relevant files used to modify the appearance of your website. 

### The theme
The theme is where you will focus your efforts. The beauty of Wordpress is that you can quickly and easily create different themes that will quickly change the whole appearance of your site - without having to update every single page. 

A theme consists of a number of different templates, the CSS, a functions file and any other relevant theme related data (e.g. images for the logo, favicon etc).

>**But I know nothing about creating a theme!**

>Yes you do! 

The wordpress theme files are written in PHP however, the PHP code is merely inserted into an existing HTML document. So when it come to writing (or editing) a Wordpress theme you really just need to have a good knowledge of HTML and CSS (which you all should). 

Go have a look at a demo Wordpress site I've installed [here](http://dev.beneb.com/testwp/), open up the inspector and have a look at the code. What do you see?

```
	<main id="main" class="large-8 medium-8 columns" role="main">

		<article id="post-26" class="post-26 post type-post status-publish format-standard hentry category-uncategorized entry">
	<header class="entry-header">
		<h2 class="entry-title"><a href="http://dev.beneb.com/testwp/?p=26" rel="bookmark">Hello world</a></h2>	</header><!-- .entry-header -->
        
        <!-- and so on -->

</article>
	</main>
    
```

That's right, plain ole-HTML. So how do I edit it? Well you don't really need to. To change the appearance, all you need to do is edit/ write some CSS.